=head1 NAME

portroach - Tool to scan for new versions of OpenBSD ports.


=head1 SYNOPSIS

    portroach build

    while (lazy) {
        portroach rebuild
        portroach check
        portroach showupdates
    }


=head1 DESCRIPTION

Portroach is an automated system designed to search for new versions of
software available in the OpenBSD ports tree. It is primarily designed for use
by OpenBSD port maintainers, who can avoid trailing around dozens of websites
looking for updates. However, I hope that others might find it useful too.


=head1 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

The following software is required to run Portroach:

    - PostgreSQL or SQLite
    - POSIX-compatible system
    - The OpenBSD ports tree
    - Berkeley make
    - Perl 5.10+

Plus we need a few Perl modules:

    - URI
    - DBD::Pg or DBD::SQLite
    - Net::FTP
    - Proc::Queue
    - LWP::UserAgent
    - MIME::Lite
    - XML::Feed
    - Try::Tiny
    - JSON

SQLite support is currently limited to non-forking mode only. That is, if you
decide to use SQLite, Portroach will only check one port at a time; this will
severely limit Portroach's speed/efficiency. It is therefore suggested that
SQLite only be used for relatively light workloads.


=head1 INITIAL SET-UP

=head2 Initialise Database

The recommended database backend is PostgreSQL.

=head3 Option One: PostgreSQL

Create database:

    # createuser -U postgres -P portroach
    # createdb -U postgres portroach

Execute the included F<pgsql_init.sql> script via C<psql>:

    # psql portroach portroach < sql/pgsql_init.sql

This will create the database tables for you.

=head3 Option Two: SQLite

Create a database file with the included script:

    # sqlite3 /var/db/portroach.db < sql/sqlite_init.sql

=head2 Configure Portroach

Review F<portroach.conf>, and check it suits your needs. The defaults should be
reasonable for most people. You can reduce C<num_children> and C<workqueue_size>
if you don't want Portroach sucking up all your resources.

Please note that Portroach's internal defaults differ from the defaults in
F<portroach.conf> - this is because without a config file, Portroach tries to be
"portable" and use its own directory for storing things under, whereas if a
config file is found, it assumes it is installed and being used "system-wide".

Any of the options in F<portroach.conf> can also be set on the fly on the
command line. For example:

    $ portroach --precious_data --num_children=8

=head2 Update Ports Tree

Ensure your ports tree is up to date.

=head2 Populate Database

We need now to populate the database with the software we want to check.

=head3 Option One: OpenBSD

To start off, run:

    $ portroach build

This takes around 70 minutes for me. Basically, Portroach is extracting all
the information it needs from the ports tree. Ports (by virtue of make) is
slow; the database we're building is much faster. After this initial build, we
will do incremental 'builds', only updating what has changed.


=head1 REGULAR OPERATION

=head2 Update Ports Tree

Ensure your ports tree is up to date.

=head2 Incremental Database Update

If sqlports was updated since your last build/rebuild,
ensure Portroach knows about the changes:

    $ portroach rebuild

=head2 Run Version Checks

    $ portroach check

This will instruct Portroach to search for new distfiles for each port in the
database. It will take several hours for a complete ports tree scan.

=head2 View Results

Now you've got some results, you can view them.

=head3 Option One: HTML Reports

    $ portroach generate

This will put HTML pages inside C<html_data_dir> - existing pages will be
deleted.

=head3 Option Two: E-Mail Reports

    $ portroach mail

This will send out an e-mail message to the maintainers of ports with updates.
The e-mail messages are opt-in; you will need to add addresses to the database
before any e-mails are sent out.

=head3 Option Three: Console Summary

    $ portroach showupdates

This will output a summary of software with outstanding updates. It is
recommended if you're checking a limited set of software/ports.


=head1 ADDING E-MAIL ADDRESSES

If you want to send e-mail reports to maintainers of updated of software, the
e-mail addresses need to be registered with Portroach. This is a safeguard to
ensure no one gets e-mails they don't want.

Use the following to manage these e-mail "subscriptions":

    $ portroach add-mail dave@example.net

    $ portroach remove-mail john@localhost

    $ portroach show-mail


=head1 CLEANING

Ports that have been removed are not automatically removed from the database, so
over time the database may contain data that doesn't refer to anything anymore.
In order to cleanup the database the "prune" command can be used:

    $ portroach prune

Currently this will ensure the following:

    - that all ports in the database still exist in the ports tree

=head1 UPGRADING

When upgrading, check the F<sql> directory for any relevant database schema
upgrade scripts. If there were multiple schema updates between the previous
version of Portroach and the version to which you have upgraded, be sure to
run each script in sequence to arrive at the latest database version.


=head1 CHECKING ALGORITHM

For anyone interested in how Portroach operates, here is a high-level summary
of the checking algorithm in use:

 Test 1:
   1) Order master sites using previous reliability data.
   2) Attempt to get an FTP listing or web server index from each site.
   3) Extract version from files found; compare to current version.
   4) Skip other tests if new or current version is found.

 Test 2:
   1) Increment each part of the port's version string and attempt to
      download file, e.g. for 1.4.2, try 2.0.0, 1.5.0 and 1.4.3

The last test is not yet included in Portroach, but I may add it at some
point, depending on the results of testing:

 Test 3:
   1) Locate port's WWW page and spider site in an attempt to find a
      page that looks like a "download area". Scan page for possible
      links to new files.


=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

=over

=item

Portroach tries to make a reasonable guess when it encounters version
strings in a different format to the original distname (e.g. 3.2,
3.6-pre7), but this is difficult and error-prone since vendor version
schemes vary wildly.

The only real problem at the moment is version strings which seem to
to count backwards (e.g. 2.11 -> 2.2).

=item

There's some difficulty in deciding what to do with trailing zeros
in version guesses. Currently, they are left intact, but this is
not always going to be the right course of action. In other words,
from 4.3.9, will the next major version be 4.4.0 or 4.4?

=item

The restrict_* variables don't affect generate/mail.

=item

Portroach doesn't handle ports with multiple distfiles very well.

=item

At least one port (archivers/zip, as of 2010-04-28) doesn't provide
a version string in the vendor's format. portroach doesn't know what
to do in this case, although the version could theoretically be
ascertained from the distfile name.

=back

=head1 HISTORY

Portscout was originally written by Shaun Amott for the FreeBSD ports tree. In
2014 Jasper Lievisse Adriaanse added support for OpenBSD. It was then decided to
fork and rename the project to Portroach to indicate a new direction, focusing
on OpenBSD allows Portroach to integrate better without carrying a burden of
backwards compatibility with the FreeBSD tree.

=head1 CREDITS

Many thanks to Shaun Amott for Portscout from which portroach is derived.
Portroach wouldn't exist if it wasn't for Shaun's great work on portscout.

Thanks for Antoine Jacoutot for suggesting the new project name, Portroach.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

=over

=item
Copyright (C) 2005-2011, Shaun Amott E<lt>shaun@inerd.comE<gt>.

=item
Copyright (C) 2014-2015 Jasper Lievisse Adriaanse E<lt>j@jasper.laE<gt>.

=back

All rights reserved.

=cut
